howto: migrate rescript lib (#111)
melange-re/melange-re.github.io: docs/how-to-guides.md

# How-to guides 

## Migrate a ReScript library to Melange

It is possible to use existing [ReScript](https://rescript-lang.org/) (formerly
BuckleScript) code with Melange, mostly as is. However, as both projects evolve
in different directions over time, it will become more challenging to do so as
time goes by, as some of the most recent features of ReScript might not be
directly convertible to make them work with Melange.

For this reason, the recommendation is to migrate libraries at a time where they

> were compatible with past versions of ReScript, for example v9 or at least v10.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
were compatible with past versions of ReScript, for example v9 (v10 at most).
```

These are the steps to follow:

> - Add an `opam` file

Reviewer: this is redundant if the dune-project files generates opam files

Author: True, but users might not have `dune` available on the global switch. I always run into this "chicken and egg" problem when using local switches, so I think it's simpler to create the `opam` file first, then the local switch, then proceed with Dune config. Wdyt?

- Add a `dune-project` file
- Replace the `bsconfig.json` file with one or multiple `dune` files
- (Optional) Migrate from ReScript syntax to Reason or OCaml syntaxes

> - Make sure everything works: `dune build @all`

Reviewer: `dune build @all` == `dune build`, so we can avoid potentially confusing people who don't know aliases yet

```suggestion
- Make sure everything works: `dune build`
```

At this point, we can create a [local opam
switch](https://opam.ocaml.org/blog/opam-local-switches/) to start working on
our library:

```bash
opam switch create . 5.1.0~rc2 -y --deps-only
```

Once this step is done, we can call `dune` from the library folder, but first we
need some configuration files.

### Add a `dune-project` file

Create a file named `dune-project` in the library root folder. This file will
tell Dune a few things about our project configuration:

```text
(lang dune 3.8)

(using melange 0.1)
```

### Replace the `bsconfig.json` file with one or multiple `dune` files

Now, we need to add a `dune` file where we will tell Dune about our library. You
can put this new file next to the library sources, it will look something like
this:

```text
(library
 (name lib)
 (modes melange))
```

Let's see how the most common configurations in `bsconfig.json` (or
`rescript.json`) map to `dune` files. You can find more information about these
configurations in the [Rescript
docs](https://rescript-lang.org/docs/manual/latest/build-configuration) and in
the [Dune docs](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/dune-files.html#library).

> #### `name`, `namespace`

Reviewer: we should document that `"namespace": "foo-bar"` should translate to `(library (name fooBar))`

Author: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-re.github.io/pull/111/commits/e60d446cff11f95d6061577f40ec31165018e949

single module with the name of the library is exposed at the top level. So e.g.
of your `bsconfig.json` had `"namespace": false`, you can add `(wrapped false)`
to your library, although wrapped libraries are heavily encouraged to avoid
global namespace pollution.

#### `sources`

Dune works slightly differently than ReScript when it comes down to including
source folders as part of a library.

By default, when Dune finds a `dune` file with a `library` stanza, it will
include just the files inside that folder to the library itself (unless the
`modules` field is used). If you want to create a library with multiple
subfolders in it, you can use the following combination of stanzas:

- `(include_subdirs unqualified)`
  ([docs](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/dune-files.html#include-subdirs)):
  This stanza tells Dune to look for sources in all the subfolders of the folder
  where the `dune` file lives.
- `(dirs foo bar)`
  ([docs](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/dune-files.html#dirs)): This
  stanza tells Dune to only look into `foo` and `bar` subdirectories of the
  current folder.

So for example, if your library had this configuration in its `bsconfig.json`:

```json
{

>   "sources": ["src", "lib"]

Reviewer: pick something other than `lib`, since bucklescript uses that for artifacts

Author: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-re.github.io/pull/111/commits/1f40d9cbf2f68fca8bd47770107d74845520041a

`public_name` field, it becomes a public library, and will be installed.
Otherwise it is private and won't be visible by consumers of the package.

#### `bs-dependencies`

Your library might depend on other libraries. To specify dependencies of the
library in the `dune` file, you can use the `libraries` field of the `library`
stanza.

For example, if `bsconfig.json` had something like this:

```json
"bs-dependencies": [
  "reason-react"
]
```

Your `dune` file will look something like:

```text
(library
 (name lib)
 (libraries reason-react)
 (modes melange))
```

Remember that you will have to add all dependencies to your library `opam`
package as well.

#### `bs-dev-dependencies`

There is no such thing as `bs-dev-dependencies` in Dune. If you need to bring
some libraries or packages for development, you can just `opam install` them, or
use the [upcoming `--with-dev-setup`
configuration](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Manual.html#pkgvar-with-dev-setup) in
opam 2.2. For example, to add `melange-jest` as dev dependency, you could add
this in your library `opam` file:

```text
depends: [
  "melange-jest" {with-dev-setup}
]
```

> Then, the library `melange-jest` would become available to your library tests.

Reviewer: I suppose this is a bit of a weird example because we'd most likely want `{with-test}` in this case.

Author: Hm right great point. I will change this to `with-test` instead (which is what `bs-dev-deps` is mainly used for).

Author: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-re.github.io/pull/111/commits/274f1b660349ad9bfa95397ab01bcb984b3a31c0

One just needs to make sure these tests are not part of a public library, if
they are supposed to stay private.

#### `pinned-dependencies`

Dune allows to work inside monorepos naturally, so there is no need for pinned
dependencies.
[Packages](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/packages.html) can be
defined in the `dune-project` file using the `packages`, and multiple
`dune-project` files can be added across a single codebase to work in a monorepo
setup.

#### `external-stdlib`

There is no direct mapping of this functionality in Melange. If you are
interested in it, or have a use case for it, please share with us on [issue
melange-re/melange#620](https://github.com/melange-re/melange/issues/620).

> #### `js-post-build`

Reviewer: maybe add an example of a rule that does this?

```clj
(rule 
  (deps (alias melange))
 ...
)
```

Author: https://github.com/melange-re/melange-re.github.io/pull/111/commits/c1f2057e2b9acfef1d35a59fc8a1487d54383c8a

The package `rescript-syntax` allows to translate `res` source files to `ml`.

To use this package, we need to install it first:

```bash
opam install rescript-syntax
```

> Note that the `rescript-syntax` package is only compatible with the version 1
> of `melange`, so if you are using a more recent version of `melange`, you
> might need to downgrade it before installing `rescript-syntax`.

To convert a `res` file to `ml` syntax:

```bash
rescript_syntax myFile.res -print ml > myFile.ml
```

You can use this command in combination with `find` to convert multiple files at
once:

```bash
find src1 src2 -type f -name "*.res" -exec echo "rescript_syntax {} -print ml" \;
```

If you want to convert the files to Reason syntax (`re`), you can pipe the
output of each file to `refmt`.

```bash
rescript_syntax ./myFile.res -print ml | refmt --parse=ml --print re > myFile.re
```

Note that `refmt` is available in the `reason` package, so if your library
modules are written using Reason syntax, remember to install it first using
`opam install reason` before performing the conversion, and also adding it to
your library `opam` file as well.

> ### Make sure everything works: `dune build @all`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Make sure everything works: `dune build`
```

Once you have performed the above steps, you can test that everything works by
running

```bash

> dune build @all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dune build
```

```

Throughout the process, you might run into some errors, these are the most
common ones:

#### Warning 16 (unerasable-opt-argument) is triggered more often than before

Melange triggers warning 16 (unerasable-opt-argument) more often than before, as
the type system in OCaml 4.12 was improved. You can read more about this in this
[OCaml PR](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/pull/9783).

**Fix**: either add `()` as final param of the function, or replace one labelled
arg with a positional one.

#### Warning 69 [unused-field] triggered from bindings types

Sometimes, types for bindings will trigger `(warning 69 [unused-field]): record

> field sitekey is never read.` errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
field foo is never read.` errors.
```

**Fix**: silence the warning in the type definition, e.g.

```ocaml
type renderOptions = { 
  foo : string
} [@@warning "-69"]
```

#### Destructuring order is changed

Destructuring in `let` patterns in Melange is done on the left side first, while
on ReScript is done on the right side first. You can read more in the [Melange
PR](https://github.com/melange-re/melange/pull/161) with the explanation.

**Fix**: move module namespacing to the left side of the `let` expressions.

#### `Pervasives` is deprecated

This is also another change due to OCaml compiler moving forward.

**Fix**: Use `Stdlib`

#### Runtime assets are missing

In ReScript, building in source is very common. In Melange and Dune, the most
common setup is having all artifacts inside the `_build` folder. If your library
is using some asset such as:

```ocaml

> external bkgImage : string = "default" [@@bs.module "./icons/overview.svg"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
external myImage : string = "default" [@@bs.module "./icons/overview.svg"]
```
